README.md, before:

# Synchrony-Anaysis-Pipeline-SE4S

SE4S 2023

Team Members: Maya Paulson, Emma Keppler, Deanna Gelosi, and Philipp Wunsch 

## v1.0

### Data Loader

**Implemented**

- AnimalData class that reads CSV files and outputs a list of Tuples for each cell
- Function `get_data_for_cell()` to return specified cell data
- Function `get_data_at_time()` to return all cell data at specified time
- Function `remap_time_values()` starts time at 0.00 seconds and rounds all time values to nearest 1/100 second
- Function `save_to_csv()` saves the AnimalData class object to a new CSV file
- Function `from_csv()` loads initial CSV file into an AnimalData class object
- Unit and functional testing for loading CSV
- Setup continuous integration yaml file for unit and functional tests

**ToDo**

- Additional unit and functional testing for `animal_data.py` and `load_data.py`
- NAN if no cell value (numpy)
- Run pylint style tests
- Enable style tests in continuous integration

### Normalization and Cell Slicing functions

**Implemented**

- created normalize_data.py: takes in animal data and saves a normalized df as a csv
- created cell_slicer.py: takes in correlation matrix df and saves cell pair txt file and df of sorted correlation matrix values
- created df_utils.py: put the function animal_data_to_df from correlation branch here so I can use it too
- created test.ipynb to test all functions in sequence without using snakmake just yet

**ToDo**

- create unit and functional tests
- best pratice formatting
- create data saving structure
- snakefile for workflow

### Visualization of Synchrony Analysis Pipeline Part

This tool is designed to visualize neural activity data, offering insightful and detailed plots that aid in understanding complex neural patterns. It supports two primary types of visualizations:

1. Line Plot: Shows neural activity over time for selected cells.
2. Heatmap: Visualizes the correlation matrix of neural activity among different cells.

***Example Usage:***

```bash
python create_plots.py -f [data_file.csv] -c [cell_names] -o [output_filename.png] -p [plot_type]
```

    -f, --file: Path to the data CSV file (required).
    -c, --cells: List of cell names for the plot (required).
    -o, --output: Filename for the output (default "output.png").
    -p, --plot_type: Type of plot (line or correlation, default line).

***1. Line Plot***

```bash
python src/create_plots.py -f data/4659_aligned_traces.csv -c C000 C001 C002 -o line_plot.png -p line
```

![example_line_plot](docs/example_line_plot.png)


***2. Correlation Matrix Heatmap Plot***

```bash
python src/create_plots.py -f data/4659_aligned_traces.csv -c C000 C001 C003 -o correlation_matrix.png -p correlation
```
![example_correlation_matrix](docs/example_correlation_matrix.png)

**Implemented**

- create_plots.py: Line plot and correlation plot
- ArgumentParser: Command line interface
- Outputs png files
- Documentation and styleguide follow

**ToDo**

- Create unit tests for each function


## Testing

### Unit Tests

1. Move into the unit_test directory.

    ```bash
    cd tests/unit_tests
    ```

2. Run unit tests.

   ```bash
   python3 -m unittest test_animal_data.py  
   ```

### Functional Tests

1. Move into the functional_test directory.

    ```bash
    cd tests/functional_tests
    ```

2. Run functional tests.

    ```bash
    chmod +x test_load_data.sh
    ./test_load_data.sh 
    ```

Commit message:

functional tests and updated README.md for correlations

README.md, after:

# Synchrony-Anaysis-Pipeline-SE4S

SE4S 2023

Team Members: Maya Paulson, Emma Keppler, Deanna Gelosi, and Philipp Wunsch 

## v1.0

### Data Loader

**Implemented**

- AnimalData class that reads CSV files and outputs a list of Tuples for each cell
- Function `get_data_for_cell()` to return specified cell data
- Function `get_data_at_time()` to return all cell data at specified time
- Function `remap_time_values()` starts time at 0.00 seconds and rounds all time values to nearest 1/100 second
- Function `save_to_csv()` saves the AnimalData class object to a new CSV file
- Function `from_csv()` loads initial CSV file into an AnimalData class object
- Unit and functional testing for loading CSV
- Setup continuous integration yaml file for unit and functional tests

**ToDo**

- Additional unit and functional testing for `animal_data.py` and `load_data.py`
- NAN if no cell value (numpy)
- Run pylint style tests
- Enable style tests in continuous integration

### Normalization and Cell Slicing functions

**Implemented**

- created normalize_data.py: takes in animal data and saves a normalized df as a csv
- created cell_slicer.py: takes in correlation matrix df and saves cell pair txt file and df of sorted correlation matrix values
- created df_utils.py: put the function animal_data_to_df from correlation branch here so I can use it too
- created test.ipynb to test all functions in sequence without using snakmake just yet

**ToDo**

- create unit and functional tests
- best pratice formatting
- create data saving structure
- snakefile for workflow

### Correlations Between Animals

This functionality is designed to take dataframes of cell data for two animals and correlate every cell in the two passed dataframes. It saves two dataframes to the output folder, one with p-values for each comparison and one with R values. It removes time periods with missing data and will shorten datasets with a mismatch in length. Run example code for processing the data in show_correlations.py.

### Visualization of Synchrony Analysis Pipeline Part

This tool is designed to visualize neural activity data, offering insightful and detailed plots that aid in understanding complex neural patterns. It supports two primary types of visualizations:

1. Line Plot: Shows neural activity over time for selected cells.
2. Heatmap: Visualizes the correlation matrix of neural activity among different cells.

***Example Usage:***

```bash
python create_plots.py -f [data_file.csv] -c [cell_names] -o [output_filename.png] -p [plot_type]
```

    -f, --file: Path to the data CSV file (required).
    -c, --cells: List of cell names for the plot (required).
    -o, --output: Filename for the output (default "output.png").
    -p, --plot_type: Type of plot (line or correlation, default line).

***1. Line Plot***

```bash
python src/create_plots.py -f data/4659_aligned_traces.csv -c C000 C001 C002 -o line_plot.png -p line
```

![example_line_plot](docs/example_line_plot.png)


***2. Correlation Matrix Heatmap Plot***

```bash
python src/create_plots.py -f data/4659_aligned_traces.csv -c C000 C001 C003 -o correlation_matrix.png -p correlation
```
![example_correlation_matrix](docs/example_correlation_matrix.png)

**Implemented**

- create_plots.py: Line plot and correlation plot
- ArgumentParser: Command line interface
- Outputs png files
- Documentation and styleguide follow

**ToDo**

- Create unit tests for each function


## Testing

### Unit Tests

1. Move into the unit_test directory.

    ```bash
    cd tests/unit_tests
    ```

2. Run unit tests.

   ```bash
   python3 -m unittest test_animal_data.py  
   ```

### Functional Tests

1. Move into the functional_test directory.

    ```bash
    cd tests/functional_tests
    ```

2. Run functional tests.

    ```bash
    chmod +x test_load_data.sh
    ./test_load_data.sh 
    ```
